C1:

Functional Components of CPU
Convert Between & understand decimal, binary, hexadecimal
how RAM works
how different parts of the CPU communicate
what a CPU instruction is
what a CPU register is
what the CPU clock represents
what the system bus is and what size it is
how the CPU provides concurrency

ALU-what kind of instructions ALU processes
CPU-what it does
CPU stack

* 8 BITS
__The byte is a unit of digital information that most commonly consists of 8 bits in every byte__. Historically, the byte was the number of bits used to encode a single character of text in a computer and for this reason it is the smallest addressable unit of memory in many computer architectures
- binary place values:
    * 1 2 4 8 16 32 64 128
    * Max value of a byte:
        - 255 decimal (128 + 64 + 32 +16+ 8 + 4 + 2 + 1)
        - FF hex 
* Nibble
# __unit of data that is 4 binary digits liong (4 bits)___
- Binary place values:
    8, 4, 2, 1
-Max value:
    15 decimal
    F hex 
   
# Functional Components of CPU
what a CPU word is
    * CPU word: the natural size of a piece of data with which the CPU can interact. Usually written down in the bit “size” of the CPU, i.e. “This is a 64-bit CPU.”
    * The CPU can quickly perform math and other operations on data of its __word__ size. (It can also work with other size data, as well, though it might not be as speedy).
    * __RAM(Random Access Memory)__: Big array of bytes that can be retrieved by index, just like a regular array.
        * The index into memory is referred to as an address or a pointer.
        * Similiar to regular indexed array: when you have the address of a value (AKA a pointer to that value), you can retrieve that value stored at that address.
    *  Nowadays most desktop computers use either 32-bit CPUs or 64-bit CPUs. The instructions in a 32-bit CPU are good at handling data that is 32 bits in size (most instructions "think" in 32 bits in a 32-bit CPU). Likewise, a 64-bit CPU is good at handling data that is 64 bits in size (and often good at handling 32-bit data too). The size of data that a CPU handles best is often called the word size of the CPU.
    * __CPU instruction__ :  A byte or sequence of bytes in RAM that the computer knows how to interpret and perform actions based on.
        *There are instructions to do math, like ADD and SUB, instructions for comparing values like CMP, instructions for jumping to other parts of memory like JMP, and many more.
        *The exact instruction names and values vary depending on architecture.
    * __CPU register__ : The CPU has a fixed, small number of special storage locations built-in. Usually there are 16 or 32 of these, and they have fixed names, such as R0, R1, R2, and so on. (Details vary by architecture.)
        *Think of them like variables you have at your disposal to use with the various instructions.
        *store the data that the instructions operate on (the data that they read and write)
        * Registers must be very fast to access (to read and write)
    * __CPU clock__ : When they say your CPU is 3.2 GHz, this is what they are referring to. It’s the number of times per second the CPU does some processing
        * Each time the clock cycles, the CPU does a bit more work.
        * Some instructions take one clock cycle to complete, but others might take several.
    * __System bus__ :  A collection of wires on the motherboard between the CPU, memory, and peripherals.
        * The memory bus connects the CPU to RAM.
        * The I/O bus connects the CPU to peripherals.
        * The control bus allows the CPU to say exactly what it wants to do on the bus, e.g. read or write a word or byte.
    *__Concurrency and Parallelism__: The CPU can do multiple things once through a variety of mechanisms, including haveing multiple cores, or other features
    such as pipelining, or hyperthreading 


# How number bases work, how to count in them, and how to convert between bases.
    * The count of the number of items doesn’t change just because we refer to it in a numbering system of a different base.
    * (the only place the numbering system matters is when we write down the number someplace ) And remember that when you do write it down, the count of what the number refers to remains the same regardless of the base you choose to write it down in.
__Bases__ : 
        * The base of a numbering system refers to how many digits the numbering system has. 
        * Decimal numbers like we’re used to have 10 digits: 0 through 9. Decimal numbers are base-10.
            * In decimal, we have 10 digits, 0-9. Multi-digit numbers have the 1’s place, the 10’s place, and the 100’s place, etc
        * Binary numbers have two digits: 0 and 1. Binary is base-2.
            * binary, we only have two digits, 0-1. Multi-digit numbers have the 1’s place, the 2’s place, the 4’s place, the 8’s place, the 16’s place, etc.
            * 1 2 4 8 16 32 64 128 256 512 1024
            2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536
            * These are all powers of 2. 2^0 = 1, 2^1 = 2, 2^2 = 4, 2^3 = 8, etc.
            * Computers find it convenient to represent numbers in base 2 for a variety of reasons. One is that it’s easy to represent as a voltage on a wire: 0 volts is a 0 and 5 volts (or whatever) is a 1. Another is that you can do boolean logic with 0 being FALSE and 1 being TRUE.
        * Hexadecimal had 16 digits: 0-9 then A-F. It’s base-16.
        * Octal; it’s base-8. (In Unix when you issue a command like chmod 755 or chmod 644, those numbers are octal.


# Convert Binary to Decimal 

```javascript
// Binary constants:

let myBinary = 0b101; // 101 binary is 5 decimal

// Converting a binary string to a Number

let myValue1 = Number('0b101');

// or

let myValue2 = parseInt('101', 2); // base 2

// All these print 5:
console.log(myBinary); // 5
console.log(myValue1); // 5
console.log(myValue2); // 5

```

Convert Binary to Decimal by Hand

+------ 8's place
|+----- 4's place
||+---- 2's place
|||+--- 1's place
||||
1010
The above example has one 8, zero 4s, one 2, and zero 1s. That is, it has one 8 and one 2. One 8 and one 2 is 10, 8+2=10, so: 
1010 binary == 10 decimal.


# Convert Decimal to Binary

```javascript
// Decimal constants (just like normal)

const val = 123;

// Converting a decimal to a binary string

const binVal = val.toString(2); // convert to base 2 number string

console.log(`${val} decimal is ${binVal} in binary`);
//Note that the result is a string. This makes sense because you already had the number in val as a Number type; the only other way to represent it is as a string.
```

# Convert Decimal to Binary by hand

 * 1 2 4 8 16 32 64 128 256 512 1024
            2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536

Example: convert 123 decimal into binary. You have to come up with sum of the powers of two that add up to it.
Start with the highest power of two that’s lower than the number: 64. We know we have zero 128s in the number, because it’s only 123. But there must be a 64 in there.
So let’s put a 1 in the 64s place:
59 has a 32 in it, so that must be a 1 in the 32’s place, as well:
Then we compute 59-32=27 and go down to the next power of two: 16. There’s one 16 in 27, so that’s a 1 in the 16s place:
Then we compute 27-16=11 and do the next power of two: 8. There’s 1 8 in 11, so that’s 1, too:
Then we compute 11-8=3 and do the next power of two: 4. There are zero 4s in
We’re still at 3 decimal, but we drop to the next power of two: 2. There is one 2 in 3, so that’s a 1:
* 1111011 binary is 123 decimal

# Hexadecimal 
Counting to decimal 16 in hexadecimal goes like this:
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 A=10 B=11 C=12 D=13 E=14 F=15

# Convert Binary to Hex:
Fortunately, __since 16 and 2 are powers of two__:
there are an __even number of binary bits per hex digit__: 
__4 bits per hex digit.__

# Binary 
Has 2 digits -> Base 2 (ake 0 and 1)
Binary digit -> Bit for short 

So if we have a 1-byte number, like 01101100, we split it in segments of 4 bits and convert each of those to a hex digit. It might be more convenient to convert to decimal first for numbers over 9 decimal.
00111100

split into sequences of 4 bits.
0011 1100

convert to hex (or decimal then hex, if more convenient):
0011 1100
 3    C      (C hex == 12 decimal == 1100 binary)

So 0b00111100 is equivalent to 0x3c. (Hex constants are written with a leading 0x in JS, C, and many other languages.)

# Converting hex to binary is the same in reverse. 4 bits per hex digit.
# Convert Binary to Hex:
Fortunately, __since 16 and 2 are powers of two__:
there are an __even number of binary bits per hex digit__: 
__4 bits per hex digit.__

More examples:

__Binary -> Decimal__ 

Convert 01010110 :
   0     1      0     1      0     1    1    0
  128    64     32    16     8     4    2    1
   0 +   64  +  0 +   16 +   0 +   4 +  2 +  0 = 86

__Decimal -> Binary__ 

Convert 168 to binary:
128   64    32   16    8    4    2    1
  1    0     1    0    1    0    0    0

Convert 45 to binary:
128   64   32   16     8    4    2   1
  0   0     1    0     1    1    0   1


__Binary -> Hexadecimal__

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 A=10 B=11 C=12 D=13 E=14 F=15

* __For binary to hexadecimal, you treat every 4 bits as a nibble. Aka the first four will be 8 4 2 1 and the last 4 will also be 8 4 2 1__

Convert 10100110 :
1    0    1    0        0    1    1    0
8    4    2    1        8    4    2    1
---------------------------------------------> # Look at binary, only send through numberes where theres 1 in the binary (not 0)
8 +  0 +  2 +  0        0 +  4 +  2 +  0
   10: A	 	  	 	     6                    → A6 hex


__Hexadecimal -> Binary__
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 A=10 B=11 C=12 D=13 E=14 F=15

Convert E7 hex:

E == 14                            7
8    4    2    1        8    4    2    1
1    1    1    0        0    1    1    1       → 11100111


Convert 56 hex:

         5                            6
8    4    2    1        8     4     2     1
0    1    0    1        0     1     1     0     -> 10100110


Convert 10110110 to decimal
Convert 10110110 to hexadecimal
Convert D5 hex to binary
Convert D5 hex to decimal
Convert C8 hex to decimal
Convert 11110001 to hexadecimal
Convert 11110001 to decimal


------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# Project related

ALU OPS

ADD  10100000 00000aaa 00000bbb
SUB  10100001 00000aaa 00000bbb
MUL  10100010 00000aaa 00000bbb
DIV  10100011 00000aaa 00000bbb
MOD  10100100 00000aaa 00000bbb

INC  01100101 00000rrr
DEC  01100110 00000rrr

CMP  10100111 00000aaa 00000bbb

AND  10101000 00000aaa 00000bbb
NOT  01101001 00000rrr
OR   10101010 00000aaa 00000bbb
XOR  10101011 00000aaa 00000bbb
SHL  10101100 00000aaa 00000bbb
SHR  10101101 00000aaa 00000bbb



Internal Registers
PC: Program Counter, address of the currently executing instruction
IR: Instruction Register, contains a copy of the currently executing instruction
MAR: Memory Address Register, holds the memory address we're reading or writing
MDR: Memory Data Register, holds the value to write or the value just read
FL: Flags, see below

8 general purpose 8-bit numerica registers R0-R7
R5 is reserved as the interrupt mask (IM)
R6 is reserved as the interrupt status (IS)
R7 is reserved as the stack pointer (SP)

Meanings of the bits in the first byte of each instruction: AABCDDDD

AA Number of operands for this opcode, 0-2
B 1 if this is an ALU operation
C 1 if this instruction sets the PC
DDDD Instruction identifier
The number of operands AA is useful to know because the total number of bytes in any instruction is the number of operands + 1 (for the opcode). This allows you to know how far to advance the PC with each instruction.

It might also be useful to check the other bits in an emulator implementation, but there are other ways to code it that don't do these checks.

Some instructions set the PC directly. These are:

CALL
INT
IRET
JMP
JNE
JEQ
JGT
JGE
JLT
JLE
RET
In these cases, the PC does not automatically advance to the next instruction, since it was set explicitly.

Meanings of the bits in the first byte of each instruction: AABCDDDD

AA Number of operands for this opcode, 0-2
B 1 if this is an ALU operation
C 1 if this instruction sets the PC
DDDD Instruction identifier
The number of operands AA is useful to know because the total number of bytes in any instruction is the number of operands + 1 (for the opcode). This allows you to know how far to advance the PC with each instruction.

Why are the ALU and the RAM read/write functions broken out? Can we just code the lines to do the work directly?
Because the ALU is a separate component on the CPU, and the RAM is a separate component off the CPU, it makes logical sense from a learning perspective to have different pieces of code handle the work.

Plus having the RAM access function there makes the code easier to read, and easier to change if the structure of RAM were to change somehow in the future.

Does the ALU handle conditionals/CMP?
Yes.

The compare instruction CMP will set the flags register appropriately indicating whether or not the values of the registers compared are less-than, greater-than, or equal.

This is actually quite similar to a subtraction, which the ALU can already do.

If I give you two numbers, a and b, and you compute the difference b - a, you can look at the result and determine if the values are equal, or if one is greater than the other.

If b - a is a positive number, it means that a is less than b.

If b - a is a negative number, it means that a is greater than b.

If b - a is zero, it means that a equals b.

So the ALU can use its subtraction circuitry to do a CMP, saving money and construction complexity.