# SYSTEM STACK

In this module we’ll continue learning about computer architecture. 
We’ll see __how peripherals connect to and interact with the rest of the system__, 
and __how requests to and from the peripherals are processed in a timely manner__.

* Most CPUs have a built-in stack that’s useful for keeping temporary data, making subroutine calls, and handling interrupts.
    -__Since the number of registers is limited on a CPU, the stack is a useful place to store data temporarily.__ 
    -The stack is a data structure so useful that CPU designers typically include it in their instruction sets.

    -Temporarily storing values if you need to free registers for other uses.
    -Saving registers so they can be restored after a function call or interrupt handler.
    -Allocating space for local variables in a subroutine call.

    The minimalist stack consists of just a few things:

    -An array for storing values (a chunk of RAM).
    -A pointer to the top element of the stack (known as the stack pointer or commonly SP)
    -PUSH and POP instructions.
    -Usually there’s no specific instruction for peeking at the value at the top of the stack. A standard memory access instruction such as LD is used for -that purpose, if necessary.

-In many architectures, the stack begins at a high address in RAM and grows downward. 
-That is, the SP is decremented when additional items are pushed on the stack. 
-If it helps, imagine that gravity is reversed and your stack is growing down from the ceiling as you push onto it.

To __PUSH__ a value in a register onto the stack:
Decrement SP.
Store the value in the register into RAM (at the address stored in SP).

To __POP__ a value from the stack into a register:
-Retrieve the value from RAM (at the address stored in SP), 
and store that value in the register.
Increment SP.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Challenge questions:
# What happens if you PUSH too many items on the stack?

# What happens if you POP from an empty stack?
It’s called Stack Underflow but in assembly that just means you’re now accessing someone else’s memory. If it is the program stack then returning to the caller function will probably fail.
Most well defined Stack datastructures will raise an exception when trying to pop when top-of-stack == bottom-of-stack
-Underflow happens when we try to pop an item from an empty stack. If top is less than zero this means that an uncaught underflow has occurred.

push data-item
This causes the data-item to be placed on the top of the stack and _decrements_ stack pointer in our _push_

pop location
The data item on the top of the stack is moved to location and _increments_ stack pointer in our _pop_

An attempt to push too many items onto a stack causes stack overflow. And an attempt to pop items off the stack beyond the “bottom” causes stack underflow

# How can you detect if the stack is empty?

# What information must be saved on the stack when the CPU is servicing an interrupt? Why?
address of the operation it needs to return to, so it needs where to continue before the interrupt

------------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Interrupts 

ex/ peripheral (a device attached to the motherboard that’s not part of the CPU) gets some work done and has to notify the CPU that the work is complete.
-It does this through a mechanism called an interrupt. When the CPU needs to be notified, the peripheral raises a signal that the CPU detects. The CPU then stops its regular processing, and redirects to another program elsewhere in memory to handle (or service) the interrupt.

Interrupts prevent the CPU from needing to continuously poll all the peripherals, freeing it up for computation.

Before executing its regularly-scheduled instruction, the CPU checks to see if any interrupts have occurred.

If any have, the CPU saves all its work (i.e. pushes all the registers and flags and program counter, and anything else it was working on onto the stack) and then begins executing the interrupt handler code which is located somewhere else in memory.

The job of the interrupt handler is to do whatever needs doing with the data that’s arrived from the peripheral. [Sometimes it’s adding a keystroke to a buffer. Sometimes it’s telling the operating system that a block of data from the disk is ready to hand over to a program.]

Once the interrupt handler is complete, we say the interrupt has been serviced. Then all the registers and flags are popped off the stack and the CPU resumes execution where it left off, as if nothing happened.

If a peripheral is low-bandwidth, i.e. it doesn’t need to transfer more than a few bytes of data (keyboards, mice, etc.), a common pattern is:

CPU receives the interrupt
CPU looks into RAM (in the case of memory-mapped peripherals) to get the value from the peripheral.
Some CPUs use a concept called I/O ports to gets the bytes from the peripheral instead.
For devices that need to send more than a few bytes of data to the CPU (disks, SSDs, etc.), they use interrupts in conjunction with something called Direct Memory Access (DMA) to communicate with the CPU.

Describe how a program would get input from a keyboard if interrupts did not exist.

Same question, except using interrupts.

How often would an external temperature sensor want to interrupt the CPU with new information? Why not more or less frequently?